---
layout: distill
title: control education at UW
description: discrete thoughts on control education
tags: education uw 
giscus_comments: true
date: 2024-07-22
featured: true

authors:
  - name: Mehran Mesbahi
    url: "https://mehran-mesbahi.github.io/"
    affiliations:
      name: University of Washington

bibliography: 2024-07-22-distill.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: Controls at UW
  - name: General resources 
  - name: Courses at UW and growing as a researcher 
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2
  # - name: Citations
  # - name: Footnotes
  # - name: Code Blocks
  # - name: Interactive Plots
  # - name: Layouts
  # - name: Other Typography?

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }
---

## Controls education @ UW ... historical commentary

Controls education and research at UW has a nice history. Generally, you can find control-oriented graduate programs in various engineering departments, including aerospace, mechanical,
electrical, and industrial/systems, and chemical engineering. However, control-system thinking 
is useful in any engineering setting. When I joined UW, this <a href="https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1251177"> <span style="color: magenta;"> historic account</span></a>
was shared with me by the late Prof. Clark.
It traces the history of how control research and education looked like in the 1960s; just a note
that this is before I was born.
There is huge gap between then and now of course, but some other efforts that I am aware of
included the Robotics, Control, and Mechatronics group and seminar series (<a href="https://www.engr.washington.edu/rcm/"><span style="color: magenta;">RCM</span></a>) that was overseen mainly by faculty
in AA, EE (subsequently ECE), ME, and CSE. The RCM seminar was a relatively large gathering- it was held every Friday 2:30-3:30 pm and most often had outside speakers. At some point, the group and their departments who were supporting
the RCM group got dispersed; for example, CSE started its own robotics colloquium.

These days, control system "minded" faculty (whatever that means) often have a number of other interests; some of us
work on optimization/ML/AI, some on aerospace autonomy/autonomous cars/robotics, some on 
power grids, some on synthetic biology. What brings this diverse group of researchers together is their interest in dynamic decision-making, architecture of system design, and performance and robustness of synthesized systems.

## Online educational resources 

There a lot of awesome resources online to learn about controls-related topics; some recommendations:

<a href="https://www.incontrolpodcast.com/"><span style="color: magenta;">in control podcast</span></a>

Brian Douglas' youtube <a href="https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCq0imsn84ShAe9PBOFnoIrg"><span style="color: magenta;">channel</span></a> and mathworks 
<a href="https://engineeringmedia.com/videos"><span style="color: magenta;">videos</span></a>

Steve Brunton's youtube <a href="https://www.youtube.com/@Eigensteve"><span style="color: magenta;">channel</span></a>

Chris Lum's youtube <a href="https://www.youtube.com/c/ChristopherLum"><span style="color: magenta;">channel</span></a>

## Courses at UW and growing as a researcher 

I am often asked about systems/control courses to take at UW, particularly for
new M.S. and Ph.D. students. One of the luxuries of being at UW is that you don't have
a shortage of good courses to take every quarter. If you want to do Ph.D. in control, the stronger 
your linear algebra, mathematical analysis, and coding would serve you well- why analysis? 
I think a course like undergraduate analysis (Rudin blue book) would make you become a more
careful reader; even if you don't want to do proofs, you have to read others theoretical results 
you read papers in control theory. It is good for you- of course, you can
continue taking more math classes, but something at the level of Rudin blue book is a must for
phd students in systems and control. For M.S. students, the sequence typically goes like:
linear algebra (510), linear system theory (547), multivariable control (548), and estimation/filtering (549).
Then you can of course take courses that you provided more depth in certain areas, such as flight control,
spacecraft dynamics, machine learning/perception, etc. I think some of this sequence will be updated
in the years to come- introducing data analysis, statistics, ML; may be part of the linear algebra curriculum
and then updating linear systems with some data driven aspects.

The other important aspect of your graduate education, in my view, should revolve around writing, presenting, and collaborating with others.
This is so important- I seriously think as engineers we all need to become better communicators. This is not trivial-
a lot of us are bad communicators because of various reasons- not knowing what to say of course is one primary reason.
But you can also be a bad communicator if you are disorganized, do not think about your audience, oversell, undersell,
too much or too little ego, insecurities, how you articulate a given idea ... for me, these are all work in progress- the process
never ends ... the sooner you start the journey, the better!

<!-- Over time, things changed- the reason being that faculty interests evolve- a person 

On becoming a successful graduate student- 

On academics in the beginning- what makes sense

good presentations

 -->